In order to organize this staggering amount of information, the mind has developed a "file cabinet" of sorts
in the mind. The different files stored in the file cabinet are called concepts. Concepts are categories or
groupings of linguistic information, images, ideas, or memories, such as life experiences. Concepts are,
in many ways, big ideas that are generated by observing details, and categorizing and combining these
details into cognitive structures. You use concepts to see the relationships among the different elements of
your experiences and to keep the information in your mind organized and accessible.

Concepts are informed by our semantic memory (you will learn more about semantic memory in a later
chapter) and are present in every aspect of our lives; however, one of the easiest places to notice concepts
is inside a classroom, where they are discussed explicitly. When you study United States history, for
example, you learn about more than just individual events that have happened in America’s past. You
absorb a large quantity of information by listening to and participating in discussions, examining maps,
and reading first-hand accounts of people’s lives. Your brain analyzes these details and develops an overall
understanding of American history. In the process, your brain gathers details that inform and refine your
understanding of related concepts like democracy, power, and freedom.

Concepts can be complex and abstract, like justice, or more concrete, like types of birds.

In psychology, concepts can be divided into two categories, natural and artificial. Natural concepts
are created “naturally” through your experiences and can be developed from either direct or indirect
experiences. For example, if you live in Essex Junction, Vermont, you have probably had a lot of direct
experience with snow. You’ve watched it fall from the sky, you’ve seen lightly falling snow that barely
covers the windshield of your car, and you’ve shoveled out 18 inches of fluffy white snow as you’ve thought, “This is perfect for skiing.” You’ve thrown snowballs at your best friend and gone sledding down
the steepest hill in town. In short, you know snow. You know what it looks like, smells like, tastes like,
and feels like. If, however, you’ve lived your whole life on the island of Saint Vincent in the Caribbean,
you may never have actually seen snow, much less tasted, smelled, or touched it. You know snow from
the indirect experience of seeing pictures of falling snow—or from watching films that feature snow as
part of the setting. Either way, snow is a natural concept because you can construct an understanding of it
through direct observations, experiences with snow, or indirect knowledge (such as from films or books)

An artificial concept, on the other hand, is a concept that is defined by a specific set of characteristics.
Various properties of geometric shapes, like squares and triangles, serve as useful examples of artificial
concepts.
