## Definition of Normality and Abnormality -

The terms "normality" and "abnormality" in behavior refer to the extent to which
an individual's behavior, thoughts, and emotions conform to societal and
cultural norms and expectations.

Normality refers to behavior that is typical or expected within a given society
or cultural context. This includes behaviors that are considered healthy,
adaptive, and functional. For example, in most cultures, it is considered normal
to seek social connection, experience a range of emotions, and engage in
productive activities such as work or study.

Abnormality, on the other hand, refers to behavior that deviates from the norm
and is considered atypical or maladaptive. This can include behaviors that are
harmful, dysfunctional, or impair an individual's ability to function
effectively in society. Examples of abnormal behavior may include substance
abuse, extreme anxiety or depression, or delusional thinking.

It's important to note that the concepts of normality and abnormality are not
always clear-cut and can be influenced by cultural, societal, and personal
factors. Additionally, labeling behavior as abnormal can be stigmatizing and may
lead to negative consequences for individuals who are struggling with mental
health issues. Therefore, it's important to approach these concepts with
sensitivity and nuance.


## Characteristics to abnormal behavior -

#### Statistical Infrequency -

One aspect of abnormal behavior is that it is infrequent. For example, episodes
of mania and depression is a type of experience that occur only in 1% of
population. The normal curve, or the bell-shaped curve, places the majority of
the people in the middle. Very few people fall at either extreme. An Assertion
that a person is normal implies that He or she does not deviate much from the
average in a particular trait or behavioral pattern.

Although some infrequent behavior do strike us as abnormal but they are not
considered as a part in the field of abnormal psychology. For example, Having
great athletic skills is infrequent, so is going through deep depression.
However, the later one is only considered to be abnormal behavior.
