Erik Erikson was a developmental psychologist who proposed a theory of
personality development that consists of eight stages, each associated with a
specific psychosocial crisis or challenge. These stages span from infancy to old
age, and each stage represents a developmental task that must be successfully
resolved in order to move on to the next stage.

The eight stages of Erikson's theory are:

1. Trust vs. Mistrust The first stage of Erikson's theory of psychosocial
   development occurs between birth and 1 year of age and is the most
   fundamental stage in life. Because an infant is utterly dependent, developing
   trust is based on the dependability and quality of the child's caregivers.

At this point in development, the child is utterly dependent upon adult
caregivers for everything they need to survive including food, love, warmth,
safety, and nurturing. If a caregiver fails to provide adequate care and love,
the child will come to feel that they cannot trust or depend upon the adults in
their life.

2. Autonomy vs. Shame and Doubt The second stage of Erikson's theory of
   psychosocial development takes place during early childhood and is focused on
   children developing a greater sense of personal control.

The Role of Independence At this point in development, children are just
starting to gain a little independence. They are starting to perform basic
actions on their own and making simple decisions about what they prefer. By
allowing kids to make choices and gain control, parents and caregivers can help
children develop a sense of autonomy.2

3. Initiative vs. Guilt The third stage of psychosocial development takes place
   during the preschool years. At this point in psychosocial development,
   children begin to assert their power and control over the world through
   directing play and other social interactions.

Children who are successful at this stage feel capable and able to lead others.
Those who fail to acquire these skills are left with a sense of guilt,
self-doubt, and lack of initiative.

4. Industry vs. Inferiority The fourth psychosocial stage takes place during the
   early school years from approximately ages 5 to 11. Through social
   interactions, children begin to develop a sense of pride in their
   accomplishments and abilities.

Children need to cope with new social and academic demands. Success leads to a
sense of competence, while failure results in feelings of inferiority.

5. Identity vs. Confusion The fifth psychosocial stage takes place during the
   often turbulent teenage years. This stage plays an essential role in
   developing a sense of personal identity which will continue to influence
   behavior and development for the rest of a person's life. Teens need to
   develop a sense of self and personal identity. Success leads to an ability to
   stay true to yourself, while failure leads to role confusion and a weak sense
   of self.

During adolescence, children explore their independence and develop a sense of
self.2﻿ Those who receive proper encouragement and reinforcement through personal
exploration will emerge from this stage with a strong sense of self and feelings
of independence and control. Those who remain unsure of their beliefs and
desires will feel insecure and confused about themselves and the future.

6. Intimacy vs. Isolation Young adults need to form intimate, loving
   relationships with other people. Success leads to strong relationships, while
   failure results in loneliness and isolation. This stage covers the period of
   early adulthood when people are exploring personal relationships.2﻿

Erikson believed it was vital that people develop close, committed relationships
with other people. Those who are successful at this step will form relationships
that are enduring and secure.

7. Generativity vs. Stagnation Adults need to create or nurture things that will
   outlast them, often by having children or creating a positive change that
   benefits other people. Success leads to feelings of usefulness and
   accomplishment, while failure results in shallow involvement in the world.

During adulthood, we continue to build our lives, focusing on our career and
family. Those who are successful during this phase will feel that they are
contributing to the world by being active in their home and community.2﻿ Those
who fail to attain this skill will feel unproductive and uninvolved in the
world.

8. Integrity vs. Despair The final psychosocial stage occurs during old age and
   is focused on reflecting back on life. At this point in development, people
   look back on the events of their lives and determine if they are happy with
   the life that they lived or if they regret the things they did or didn't do.

Erikson's theory differed from many others because it addressed development
throughout the entire lifespan, including old age. Older adults need to look
back on life and feel a sense of fulfillment. Success at this stage leads to
feelings of wisdom, while failure results in regret, bitterness, and despair.

At this stage, people reflect back on the events of their lives and take stock.
Those who look back on a life they feel was well-lived will feel satisfied and
ready to face the end of their lives with a sense of peace. Those who look back
and only feel regret will instead feel fearful that their lives will end without
accomplishing the things they feel they should have.
